# cs245

Principles of Programming Languages

This course is an introduction to the study of programming languages. All programmers work in some programming language, be it Python, Java, C, C++, Haskell, or something even more exotic. Where did these languages come from? Why are they designed the way they are? How do they evolve? How can we contribute to them? When starting a project, what language should we use?

We will gain a greater understanding of these issues by treating Java as a semester-long case study in language design. Java was released in 1996 and has evolved significantly since then. The two biggest innovations have been generics (introduced with Java 5 in 2004) and anonymous functions (introduced with Java 8 in 2014). Java now plays host to several key language concepts, chiefly: object orientation, parametric polymorphism, and functional programming. Java is also a typed language (meaning that the compiler will warn if you, say, try to use a chunk of text as a number), allowing us to study type systems. The language also demonstrates several design errors – mistakes in the design of the language that, in some cases, require that all Java programs run a bit slower than they otherwise could. These errors are a fantastic window into the design process.

Alongside our study of Java, we will cover the basics of the Haskell programming language. Haskell demonstrates some of the same features as Java (parametric polymorphism and functional programming) while introducing new ones: pervasive type inference and stateless programming (often called purity). Haskell takes a very different approach to programming than other languages do, and learning it gives one a different perspective on programming in general. In addition, Haskell is ideal for implementing a language interpreter. Several assignments will involve modifying a Java interpreter, written in Haskell. (That is, this is a Haskell program that, when it runs, accepts a Java program as input.)
